---
title: Object-Oriented Programming
---

# Object-Oriented Programming
At this beginning of this course, we compared computer code to a recipe: A recipe has ingredients and instructions, and computer code has data (variables) and statements. 

Functions let us organize and "hide" our instructions, letting us execute lots of instructions with a single statement. They make our code a bit easier to understand, easier to organize, and more powerful.

### Thinking In Objects
However - let's think about the more complex computer programs we deal with on an everyday basis:  
* A **videogame** might have _characters_ and _items_, each with their own attributes such as a name, health, etc.  
* A **webpage** might have interactive _buttons_, _input boxes_, _ads_, and _images_.
* An **app** on your phone might have multiple _pages_, each with their own _buttons_ that do various things.  

What do all these types of software have in common?

Well, they all have various **Objects** in them.  
Object-Oriented Programming (or OOP for short) refers to a way of coding that builds on this concept of objects.

An **Object** in code will have two types of things on it: 
1. **Data** (called _member variables_), and 
2. **Methods** (which are called just another name for functions that belong to an object).

### An Example: Nice Kitty!

As an example, let’s say we wanted to write a program that has a cat in it.
First, let's think about the _attributes_ a cat might have that make it unique:
1. A name
2. Fur color
3. A weight
4. A particular Tail length

Given what you know about writing code, how would you express these attributes?  
That's right, with variables! It's just that in this case, these variables conceptually all belong to a single object.

Next, let's think about the things a cat _does_:  

1. Eats
2. Sleeps
3. Purs
4. Meows
5. Hisses

These are all *verbs* describing actions. What does that remind you of when it comes to code?
That's right - these actions could all be expressed as _statements_ in code. It turns out that in Object-Oriented Programming, the statements for an object are always organized into _methods_, aka "member functions".

If this is all a little confusing - no worries, we're going to go ahead and build this Cat object in the next section, and all will become clear!
